The city hath a great council of all 
and curious representations ; but the most 
years 1605. and 1606. In the south isle of 
court, and one tall portico over another 
church which looks towards the two pil- 
this language, which the ministers preach 
again{ft the {pade N, the fpiral is turned Venete@ claffis bis Imperator 
by a difference that happened about the 
civilian that read, who was often inter- 
was my merchant. 
which are afterwards not to be observed, 
dinal’s cap of brass, Habuit de nocte visi- 
palace on the left hand, where the Zurki/h 
Delegates are sent from the several col- 
bow. 
close to the ground. They bring wine, 
at a village call’d Assen. The deputies 
St. Mark’s church hath over the great 
every night, two of them riding by turns 
sostegni, which keep up the water of the 
hour after we passed through a little river, 
AEgypt. Facea major n. d. Tordylium M. 
dua gentleman’s company let fly immedi- 
Erasmus was born: the upper part of the 
shoes or stockings, having only sandals 
very cold and snowy weather, and the 
came to Spire, where foldiers examin’d us, Spire. 
benumb’d with cold, that he had not the 
and like Yalcum, and is found on Monte or the 
In the middle of the choir is a stately 
Ocymoides muscosus ; Tuber monstrosum ad 
non asperae) similis ; Clematis tetraphyllea 
saluted with four, who returned their 
vorum, Vandolorumq; Regine, Ar- 
leagues riding, went over two draw- 
we had. 
describ'd in painting and writing seve- 
Four Consult. 
Genoa, but not so big, where is this in- 
cupine, sea carp, ostrich egg with faces 
all the founders of religious orders in their 
20 senators, two and two together, in 
read, over the chair the wall is well 
his hand; and after it followed a great 
supported by the hands of two angels. 
the cross till they have been abroad in 
15. Barbone; 16. Lucerne; 17. Boba; 
Placidius Reina, a Bolognese, is chief 
37° 
transcribe out of Bosius his history Della 
€$c, who are at liberty to return home 
all the religious orders, who went two 
land and her 365 children born at one 
at the entrance a canon ftood ready with 
Greeks in general treat with the greatest contempt those who have 
all four died, leaving their estates in the 
having a high wall about the top of it, 
They fay their devotions feven times in a 
There was a fair round church building 
In the bishop’s court, differences among 
The prince elector hath a palace here, 
rest hasted away with the marquis’s son 
A neat cloifter of Francifcans (the fame Franci/- 
podesta’s. The podesta or governor of 
fortifications round, and a steep rocky 
chia ; 47. Sardoné ; 48. Renga ; 49. Den- 
pictures and inscriptions to S. Ambrose, 
hours time ; then hold it in the illumi- 
the middle stone had 1654 engraven on it. 
a little diftance further on the fame fide, 
Every great town or prefecture hath a 
monly re-elected the second year; and 
which are strong and well trench’d about, 
chevins. This court is called De Commis- 
bridges, and came into Gertrudenburg ; 
ciples, and many other relicks, The 
in their banners is like the Eng- 
scription printed in Hegenitius his itinerary, 
shoot at; where, upon some solemn times, 
rotam.) They had pretty store of straw-
made by Michael Angelo. 
One evening a little after Ave-Mary Skippon. 
Nevisal, a long cake: 5. Torte, a little 
olives.
care of most affairs, except the monies, A commit- 
We went by waggon about an hour 
roofed. In the body or nave of the church 
runs by the inner wall, is an ancient stone, 
their red damask robes, with shoulder- 
untanned skin—a sort of coat without sleeves, of the coarsest white 
The market-place is neat, having a piaz- 
all Roman catholick, except some few 
eaneed Paganello; 9. Zuateé; 10. Spa- 
Burcet where are many bathing-houses, 
36. Canis Macul. 37. Gamari; 38. An- 
chief senate, and to a double number of 
of the old temple may be easily per- 
mory of the brides recovered out of the Nefcio Romanum Metellum 
wall, 
upon a Turk, and this written, 
three. At last the gallies of Sicily were 
sort to this place all the day, and several 
altar of marble. A monument here to 
from Glaris in Switzerland, and on them 
 
sworn to defend, Anno 1572, 19 July, 
fhe at laftbcheaded. The occafion of his Palmas accepturus obiit 
ket-place, which is a little square ; the 
here ; he divided the garden into 12 
greater sums, before inferior judges cal- 
the V. Mary’s letter was carry’d. They 
of land a strong castle, called Ca. S. Elmo. 
are elected four, in some but two, con- 
the bishops of Augsburg from St. Dionysius, 
garden is very neat, having two fair ar- 
er, all which time the people stood very 
thro’ Herstal, a village (where 500 or 
Five or fix of thefe engines belong to Se in Vrbem hofte effundente 
was crooked and stony to Brescia ; where, 
3. Bodicolo, 6 Broncini; 4. Meforo 5. 
and walks. 
fair monument, with the statue of a bishop 
Out of the Vroetschap, by most votes, 
who collects all their revenues in this 
very great. They say there are some 
before them, with the arms, &c. of their 
top, is a labyrinth of narrow walks, and 
we went in the passage-boat, and in five 
cocks killing a fox, and in another four 
the Rhene, and above two hours more 
garden with fountains in the ditch. Great 
derable for trade; and passing by many 
The Dominicans church is a fair build- 
stal; Cornu avis pifcatorii ex India; 
Anno MDCXXVI. 
a hollow wood f f. 
first examined by the guard. 
quaints the prince with them. The in- 
vered. In the body of the church is this 
cifix: at one end of it is an inscription. 
the remainder of the way (five miles) 
5. Ogma uxor Baldwini, Filia Gisberti 
handsome 
which is raised to defend the country from 
Another hospital where poor girls are 
nument of the Zabarels are in this church, 
we observ’d a pulpit and confessors seats 
governor of Bredah; he died 26 Jun. 
Mose, and the adjacent country. On the 
and, four miles from Romanengo, came 
we saw many great and long boats 
a strong sconce and entred the river Zoome, 
Bar and France. In the four books of the 
old, and of timber work : water runs thro’ 
variegated marble. In the hall hang two
the town ; but one land-gate, and a little 
nated air, and it will prefently imbibe 
postern, which we went out at, and 
and baited at Lans, four hours from 
ginning of the river (that runs to Dort) 
Leda, in a group with Castor and Polux, in the duke of Bracciano’s pa- 
Osanengo, a village , and three miles fur- 
Upon the snow they draw sledges, which 
nish’d for giving a cuff on the ear to one 
bat in terra, Joan. vi. Reddidit Chiro- 
mine; for riding further upon the Downs, 
Gulich was about three years ago in the 
Two miles from this fort we had a strait 
which began in the duke’s palace. First 
The concilium Ecclesiasticum ordains mi- 
Triumphus hoc eft qui Crete pofitus le 
of ground, and in Arabick was call’d, Sceb 
after a short examination of the searcher, 
kins an English merchant, who civilly 
read to him. We heard a nobleman of 
and is curiously painted with mosaick 
but for one year, but they are most com- 
the great master’s arms. The 
of three sides, we met with one Mr. Hop- 
some in white disguises : after the male- 
Comiti, Principp. Sac. Imp. Vindici, 
non, a great number of banners, car- 
flags, 
Tobacco is much planted hereabouts. 
bad weather disordered the procession of 
fair building, where we saw in a pretty 
ture by his sister Magdalena Corvino. 
We went up another easy ascent, and 
le Citelle, two round buildings; and re- 
the council to name others. 
1. Matilda wxor Baldwini, mater Ar- 
bin, a civil lawyer who is called a Pen- 
almost half one of the sides is to be open’d 
and in cold weather many wear mufflers. 
The hospital is fair and large ; over 
wing is a handsome brass canopy over an 
welcome with three shot. They came for 
nediciine order, and, thro’ a grate in their 
fture, having her hands and face unco- 
The abley 
fioner. These states are called the Ver- 
and observed earth cast up, as at the en- 
fay) 700 ducats. This Cavo-fango boat Affanum Baffam Babylonia domitorem 
This church is square within, and flat 
This family of Fuggerus is now but in a 
of which we took notice of, viz. 
There are five families of the prince 
carved in Parian marble, and another lion 
and in the year 1576, 8 Nov. all the 17 
Cyparissi radicem ; a monstrous branch of 
May 21. The eve of the feast, arriving 
to see it, the Venus of Medicis has not escaped censure. Most con- the Venus de 
are 33 dames of the choir, and 16 lay- 
paid five julii a man ; then we were rowed 
In the piazza before the palace is a cu- 
gin Mary’s picture, which were placed 
knights of Rhodes ; which island they 
The picture of S. Carlo with this in- 
Mary ; and underneath is written, 
their apartment. In the wall towards 
inftituta, ut in teftamento rogato per D.D. 
and over every one of these is a book open- 
party, with an acknowledgment of his 
selves. After the last prayer, a clerk 
moons, having deep ditches ; and with- 
van Everson vice-admiral of Zealand, and 
In another chapel is a marble with the 
Courts of judicature are kept in this hall, 
or are not able to maintain their child- 
there is an inscription explaining them : 
van Wichlene, &c. int yaer XCHII' ex 
a well here, wherein, they say, fish were 
Incipiunt Patres borvrida peftis abit. 
palace, church, &c. are in the ifland of 
ner.
1. Paulus the jurist holding a book, 
every quarter of an hour) we had a view 
tion a trumpet founded. He hung all 
they would uncover their corn, 
which is indifferently built, having two 
At the upper end is a small picture of 
and in the greater, causes of 300 florins 
book, with or without the word ETEPTHTHE, in large capitals, ac- 
Then we came into a fair hall, which 
dow hath many curious pictures on the Fuggerus 
president of the college, and in his ab- 
Low-Countries, Germany, Italy, and France. 
first went into the Celestines convent, and 
all along, where the tide beats, a strong 
of the several members of aman, ex- 
Eccles. and that council, if need be, ac- 
two chosen by the landed men of the 
order. 
Vicenza proclaimed banditto, Jan. 8. 
street were erected several arches with 
a very thick skull of a footman ; many 
Aquinas, we went into a narrow school- 
and over the door of it is written, 
stantin M. they say, is preserv’d here. 
Adjoyning to this hall is the podesta’s 
portici (to walk in) built upon them ; and 
angustis.Cocco del Congo, the figure of which, 
leges to the Hague, where they consult 
ing between two lanthorns, and people on 
palaces on each fide, about the middle of 
Ludov. XIII. of France ; Charles V. 
Mecenigo. f7ys Mocenigo, who hath deferved this fol- 
dral, a strong stone building, and high 
the emperor Frederick kneeled when he 
double pully Z, andis faften’dto the chain Qui Mocenice genti SKIPPON, 
Gee Behind 
Senatu, and of 200 florins, if there be 
in the chief street. In a goldsmith’s 
rious paved and shady way, which was 
A fair old head of Vitellius ; and this 
fortefcue the priorefs, and with Madame 
making his visits. In one long and large 
The fortifications are neatly kept, ha- 
during the fermon, a fellow gathers 
we reach’d Bolonia, we took notice of many 
the walls of Bononia, and gave in our 
none of that sex were sick here ; and 
icly.| | Low-Countries, Germany, Italy, and France. = 505 
We entred a fair glased cloister, and 
prophecy by them. 
here; alfo three hairs of our Saviour’s 
are pictured with mosaick work, repre- 
and on each side with brick fet edge-ways. 
Americ. Caryophyll. anguslif. Malva fol. 
Some of the altars are not yet finifh’d. 
strong city in the mountains. A little 
vernment with the seven provinces in the laying and 
houses, and every shopkeeper drest up 
Razza; 34. Barracolé; 35. Squiaina ; 
gory XII. Innocent IX. Gregory XV. and 
branches of several veins. 
Padua, and an Oliverian, or white monk. 
and fairly built; two ftately marble en- 
of one slate stone, which are brought 
by sitting every day an hour or two to ar- 
tapers and a crofs being carry’d before 
picture of the three eaftern kings isa 
pretty rooms, wainscotted with fir ; the 
Pius II. is buried; the cupola, and over 
passengers. Before we set forward we 
service three years ; but they are usually 
streets are indifferently even; in one of 
place, well walled; but hath few houses 
with figures dancing, and underneath is 
lish cross, and is quarter'd with 
three or four times in a week to decide 
chapter was read in the pulpit, lighted 
are these inscriptions ; 
and there one of them is elected. 
lighted candles standing before the vir- 
death creeping out, and holding out his 
ving a broad trench of water about them : 
Bredah, and other the ftates towns, to 
In the navy courts there is no appeal 
of the money was written POAION, and a 
belongs to, desiring the offence may be 
are determined. But an appeal lies, in 
hour and an half, without fpeaking a 
very loud. In another large room there 
a father: the rector’s name is Bennet. 
lace at Rome. The original of the Greek medals of the Syrian kings and 
From the walls we had a prospect of a 
X tix’d towards the bottom of the fcoop. Sutim juffit militare Leonem Se 
May 22. We went by waggon, and 
read to them. 
2 1663. 
north side, and four on the south side ; 
persons waited about the church with dishes 
present archbishop of Naples, built of 
bulatory or itinerant court (from whence 
guns, 2. fencers, 3. hand-bow, 4. crofs- 
Clement VII. 
and at thefame timeloofening the ropeZ., Ad gloriam provocaturus 
of Hercules and a dragon. 
square building. The streets are not 
have a secretary and a treasurer. 
ther, Romanengo, a great village or burgo, 
lars, upon the rail of a balcony, two 
a boccale and a half, which the workman 
company of an ingenious Augustine monk, 
salt-houses, half an hour’s walk from Ar- 
clearly discern’d the disjunctions of bones, 
and at Lorzi, much flax is sown, and linen 
a horn in the streets of Gulich. 
for a fish-market; many large and hand- 
translated by Joan. L. Griti, out of Matth. 
nato. Alberto Auftriaco, Maximili- 
house. 
600 boors live) belonging to the prince 
man (whose son is a cardinal) came 
viz. Super Aspidem et Basiliscum conculcabis) 
nisters by laying on of hands, after exa- 
fteeple not unlike St. Mark’s tower. This 
The government of Ferrara is by a 
Magno Max. univerfi Chriftiani orbis, 
good picture, 
peace, tributes, &c. to be debated, there 
num, 
cord b, which is 
Much land hath been lately recover’d and 
ciula; a book of insects painted by his 
letter to this city. 
Albergo. In the same boat we had the 
red amber, given him by the king of 
In both these the pensioner or advocate 
in the middle, seem’d to stand upright ; 
Betonicae ab ipso inventa ; Labrum Veneris 
marina Neap. Bardana de Congo ; Helle- 
one within another, king’s crab, a cir- 
quence can be drawn from hence that such an attitude was borrowed 
One day after dinner we walk’d a cu- 
child, which differ little from those in a 
Among many verfes we tranfcrib’d 
SKIPPON. the inhabitants are of the protestant re- 
cutcheons of death’s heads, &c. 
forteited his government. Into this union 
The prince Palatine is supreme head in 
Poland ; a skeleton in wax made by 
the choir, the duke of Arschot’s genealogy 
the level of the country. Here is an in- 
2. Albertus, having a book thus inscrib’d, 
master every year. 
so large and the houses not so fair as at 
and near the water-gate is a handsome 
is a little house, where six troopers watch 
Towards the land or S. W. is a strong 
coffin of brass supported by four legs. 
be in that place. 
Ind. altiss. Evuca Tanacetifol. Genifta alp. 
from this as an original, and, even in those times, accounted the master- 
AEgypt. & Ind. with Indian characters ; 
Feb. 13. Having travelled by water all 
operatur per charitatem. 
four doors here are the marble pictures 
Comiti Flandrie, &c. Domine fue 
quarters, called by the apostles names. 
About the porto are these three cities, 
Caftello, which is joyn’d to another by a 
cer viridis parvus, am fem.? 43. Canc. 
not much more than we did at Lindaw. 
X’ti tenentur fingulis annis in perpetuum 
in Malta. 
arms of the king of England, and the 
queen Elizabeth, fhe being reprefented Aureo, @reoq, numifmate donatus eft 
fmall walled and trench’d place called Al- 
people in the Contado di Chiavenna are 
which is well floored with a plaister. On 
reflection in the air, which was discern’d 
Nigh the exchange, on the Key-side, is 
where the lazaretto is built : it seems al- 
ing pope, who was a knight of this order, 
ardifca fermarfi o ligar barche @alcuna forte dentro delle penelli Sotto tutte le pene con- 
streets center in the market-place. 
under them printed in Schottus. 
Doleman, and one troop of horse. 
other Grisons) compounded of high Dutch, 
Succour’s chapel in Bruffels: fhe was cur’d 
duke, and the fenators were placed in 
habet. 
of Holland is president, and takes the 
A council called the Vroetschap, or den 
dis, 6 Gote dimar; 29. Panotti; POnele 
under one is written, 
the number nominated. The admiral is 
the Grand Turk. And A.D. 1536, they 
ceiv'd in the semicircular place the high- 
Over the gate is written. 
The Domo is a mean building 
namunda secunda Clusii; Chelidonium fol. 
nor knew us before; which is not usual 
goods ; and then we walk’d almost a mile 
is of, the noble Venetians walk in the 
recreation. In the afternoon they work 
soldiers examined us, and then we went 
the windows and balconies, lamps stood 
theatre, but is now the court yard before 
went several men and boys with baskets 
Alfonso Litta, now archbishop of Milan. 
great princes of Europe, and this inscrip- 
At this village live many anabaptists. 
men, viz. 
the {coop is pulled open, that the mud Bellica Virtute clariffimus 
S, Clare, 
Underneath are many porphyry pillars. 
hospital they were maintain’d in, and 
the Palazzo di Piccbini at Rome; in the beasts with the Zoro Farnese, at 
rities, viz. a rattle-snake’s skin, sea- 
front, is very great, but not yet finish’d ; 
9. The nobility of Arnhem. 10. The 
to this figure, 
gether, or, if the crime be worthy of 
private escape out of this college, and in 
Friselanders, and three others. 
Mich. Angelo; Cocus Maldavicus ; Ra- 
Roman stones, with figures and inscriptions, 
recitando Pfalmum de profundo pro anima 
a large branch’d candlestick of crystal, 
and injury at the convention usually held 
splendid shew, the shops having tapers 
Saxony are vicars of the empire. 
Nulla harum poterit monentem cernere, 
cool, by reason of the rain and thunder 
nister of the place. The greatest part of 
splendid and rich, were the goldsmiths 
that they continue two years. 
A piece with seven bores, to be dischar- 
larger space of ground than the outward 
The Engadine is in the Lega della 
Cucurbita quadrangularis Ind. nigra ; Ro- 
L. Zuanne Quer’m Pr. L. Piero Brag’n. P’r. Zuanne Moretti Nod’ro, 
tions, which towards the land are thick 
This island hath a council sitting at 
learnt Hellenic in the schools of England, France, or Italy. 
and at every platform observ’d a little 
entred the canale di Giudecha, and pafsd 
their carbines) into the Venetian territory, 
this inscription, viz. 
writing. 
Another monument of one of the house 
puty from the prince of Orange for the 
ramosum cornuti ; Chamaedryos spuriae spec. 
do, is, to urge a confession from the 
several parts of Brabant. 
sity, or persons of known credit. 
bath-water breeds great store of fish, 
with three neat statues kneeling to a cru- 
Venetians possession, who placed these 
trance of mines. From these hills we had a 
brought us to the walls of Collen, where Collen. 
houses are of brick, and most of the 
lique of the crofs. The church is new 
wind in our faces ; Mr. Ray lost his fight 
struments; a great piece of brass twenty 
pillars in the roof, which, when we stood 
all built of stone. Great store of provi-
makes them uneven, there being many 
mast-wood. Here are three companies of 
walk we pass’d over two draw-bridges and 
out the walls is a long house where they 
afar off. On one of the banners was 
father, one Barton or Hamerton, who is 
For the ending of fuits under 60 flo- 
this country subjects, who swear fealty 
self not able to be at the charge of print- 
Both the judge and consuls are elected 
themselves. 
pillars: There are several fair rooms, viz. 
ginning area great many descents, in trees 
four walks are two pyramidal figures of 
factor had done his devotion, he ascended 
Without one of the gates is an aque- 4 zque- 
rock ; as are also the bulwarks, and half 
Nigh this pillar I once observed an offi- 
14 Jurati (but none must be chosen out 
Feb. 29. We hired horses (seven livres 
Italian, Spanish, French, and their own 
picture of a duke praying to the virgin 
the altar is curiously painted. In a chapel 
lower rooms of it are neatly paved with at Rif 
lish merchants have great privileges, and 
Another day after dinner, walking an Kkippon. 
vent trials before the Eschevins. 
but when we stood towards one end, they 
to the people, and then they all gave a 
At the Englifh Jefuits college, a mean Englith 
inscriptions set up by the university in 
of the cloister are also well pictur’d, and 
at Porta Paula, where we left our bol- 
The sates- In the states-provincial of Holland and 
in a wrought and gilt piece of plate; about 
Bossu, the king of Spain’s admiral ; the 
steeple at the further end. Here the 
country and city, faw Bredah steeple, and 
further had a prospect of the city of Col- 
leg of a mummy, which he said was 
that hangs before the altar of our lady of 
prove their noble descent for four gene- 
nor is Baro de Palan. 
Arschot are, argent, three bars, gules, quar- 
of plants in his garden, where we faw 
who hath no suffrage, but observes what 
two notaries, two advocates, and one 
embaflador’s faces, and afterwards in the 
nument. 
lungs, and two schemes of those in the 
canale della Giudecha. Firft we pafs’d by 
tampo mafime che alla riva capitaffero barche 0 copani per recever pratica ne meno 
bring wine out of the Valteline, and mer- 
liver, one of which is like that in Dr. 
hour in a strait paved way, we came to
are one nobleman and four others. Co- 
riously painted ; we took notice of painted 
Maufoleum puta fpettator thefe Englih ea 
preserved with balsam, &c. Piscis Icb- 
The states-provincial of Zealand consist The states- 
king of Spain in it. Schottus mentions this 
of Malta or Malta Illustrata, says, There 
mination and testimonials from the uiver- 
Ganda habuit mentem, nunc quoq3 corpus 
have each of them 100 scudi. 
At the exchange, being only a cloister 
flourishes, is inscrib’d,
wards to Rome, whence he was also ba- 
Essex, cardinal Richlieu ; prince Henry, 
is painted with arms, &c. On one side 
Here we began to reckon our expences 
a banditto for this fact. He went after- 
habits. 
* See Richardson’s Treatise of Painting and Sculpture. 
pleasant woods to a little walled place 
i8. Bifhe; 19. Menola; 20. Uranofco- 
circuit thro’ the grand canal, and the 
city ministers, two deputies from each 
came 24 mint-men in long blue cloaks, 
the French embaflador fate next to the 
brass monument carved and adorned with 
 
soned the drink, and two the meat, and 
to receive thro’ it a little infant, there- 
have no place in (but are under the go- 
a shark, an Indian axe made of stone, 
wenches are married every year by the 
able in the world.  
6. Friseland Omlandica, then joined. 
 
the intermediate cartilages hardening into 
perfect use of some for some time after. 
her being miraculoufly cur’d of lamenefs, 
fram Dort: when we landed, a porter dam. 
sina, came into port two Malta gallies, 
speak Italian well, being near the Valte- 
We vifited the Engli/h nuns of the Be- 
The great church is dedicated to St. The great
52. Paganello radiis dorfi longioribus ; 
court are painted with the arms of the 
of S:. Mark, and made this following 
the street, is an iron grate big enough 
we observ’d the country to be low and 
shap’d ; but the cross they have 
procession, first went two bearing standards procession. 
building, where we saw the pictures of 
workmen perceiv’d the ground not firm 
of Drent. bearing the impositions, and hath an am- 
ing the story of his death, &c. well car- 
ged at seven several times. 
committee or another council, which takes 
this prince of Orange his grandfather ; 
The Lord’s prayer is thus, in one dia- 
land consists of a Scout (Quaesitor) who vernment 
It is faid a Frenchman invented it, and Fuge confiliarium virga caftigavit 
&c. also upon horses backs. When the 
that senate, if the plaintiffs are not satis- 
tar, which was opened this day, mufick 
Here we saw twelve rooms well filled 
a great many almond-trees. 
skeletons of animals are preserv’d. Cor- 
roof’d, like Covent-garden church. At 
letin, and met with our arms: Here we 
and candlesticks made of Orichalcum, In 
carved on it, twelve dodecaedrons of ivory 
tinels on the walls. The road hither was 
within presently attends and takes out 
gree is then continued through several 
man, we came on a paved road in a wag- 
jollity ; the castles and forts fir'd their can- 
 
spade thrusting away Judas from under 
testant party. 
the pacification at Gant. 1579, many of 
room are the ordinary sort of people ; 
are written; their stoves or Stufae are 
attired with a cloth of silver robe, flow- 
yet here is usually a fresh and gentle 
wall is inscrib’d, 
there is the beginning of a stately choir : 
nominates three or four, and recommends 
hence we travell’d close by Lorzi nova on 
pedeftal of a pillar whereon the ftatue of 
Chiavenna has 3000 florins for two years. 
the east end is a marble erected with this 
the water generally seems hotter than ours 
tres; 24. Corvo; 25. Scrofanello; 26. 
terwards 15. Overvyssel. And 16, Gronin- 
Feb. 12. In the evening we went out 
Ranunculus Villosus alpestris ; Alsine altissima 
painted. On one side of the entrance is 
end of this channel we turned to the left, 
tues. The church within is handsome, 
leave. An hour after dinner, the time 
on his right hand went the pope’s nuncio, 
Rome; in the child in Commedus’s arms, in the Farnesian palace; and in 
The fish called Cepole are driven into 
passage over a high mountain, having 
E. €G* M: 5B. eM. 
the back is a little too deep, confidering the object is a soft plump female ; 
on it. A handsome little court with a 
Holland and West-Friseland, &c. 25 years 
An. Sal. MDLXXL 
We saw the forges where iron is melted 
to collect rarities in Italy, &c. 
by two marble lions; over that a stone, 
(where many little bells hang that chime 
an altar, and drefs’d up in a fitting po- 
which is this inscription ; 
Breden Raden, consisting of 40 in Leyden, 
at Rome : above this is a picture repre- 
tion concerning them. 
Middleburg, call’d the Staten van de Ey- 
Under coats of arms is infcrib’d, 
Auftrie Archiducibus, Belgie of 
the Olio (at this time a shallow river) and 
erected with a lyon on the top, and on 
In the suburb, nigh the river, which 
three hatchets gules; thus, 
out of the other. 
the famous physician, who led us thro’ 
quarry: this was probably some adite to a 
Rheni Bononiensis ; Solanum Americ. fructu 
May 20. About five in the morning 
a subterraneous passage from his house to 
treasurer, and a sollicitor. Those places 
mous for the burial of a countess of Hol- 
the Marsa or chief port; and Marsa Mas- 
sters, but in his having a larger stipend, 
bishop of Spire, but, since the reforma- 
called Berchem, five hours from Gulich ;
is the body of St. Daniel (one of the 
Other parts of the city on the hills have 
alcuno fia chi fi voglia dentre delle Colonelle flampada qui avanti ill’mo Mage’ to in 
cross hangs at their breasts, thus 
We were six hours going to our bait at an 
2, Arnulphus major filius Baldwini, 988. 
the king and queen of France ; king 
the church, we took notice of these, viz. 
his brother (lately dead) made with in- 
often as you do fo, andhold it in a dark 
college at Rome) were of the company 
barum or banner which appear’d to Con- 
the Rhamnus 2. Clusii: it grew thus, He 
dispenc’d with after a year. They wear 
of water, which is kept up higher than 
fis Augufti ac etiam Deum exorare quo- 
admiral of Zealand, 18 years general of 
the Aulica excepted, 21 inall, the five 
Minheer Lambson’s one of the states ge- 
giore. of S. Tho. Aquinas, where an altar is 
of silver our Saviour was sold for. It was 
a dry cauldron, where it is only made hot, 
The second, Hope, with an anchor and 
aloud. 
place consisting of a street of houses, 
controverfies. 
proceffion, from S. Maria Formofa in me- Totum regnum reftituit 
eldest alive at her father’s death ; the duke 
was thus: firft, lay fmall bars of iron” ~ 
tered with another coat that bears argent, 
drosace alt. Matth. Acetosa arifol. Tithy- 
We were in one of their doels or gilds 
Defiit 
room, where the students wrote after a 
the eldest daughter that died before her 
ium ; Seseli AEthiop. Herba M. Baldi; An- 
transfuses itself thro’ the parenchyma of 
nock (who has a fifter in the nunnery at 
nefit of carriage. 
fit D. Fo’ es de Burgholochis die xxvii menfis 
miles to Logrado, another village, where, 
tured with several stories, and under each 
Even’ Nani Hier’ Supe’ Aloii Ren’ Sa Prow 
walled town, five hours walk from hence ) 
we saw three or four more such passages, 
black amber ; another amber crucifix of 
ciscus Grimanus ; the pictures of Hierony- 
Hieracii fol. Abrotanum faem. Inod. Alsine 
occafions that belong to this convent. 
croce and great master, and vow chastity, 
the child, which is taken care of by the 
26 July, they agreed upon 21 articles; 
dle. On the walls are painted an obe- 
foot long ; another cover’d with leather ;
Sereniffime Principi D. Wabellez, Danie, 
The bishop hath a pretty palace. 
a temple of Romulus and Remus, who dore. 
se bene gesserit. In criminal cases they send 
that Manheim hath. 
tidie, prafertim de fero in earum orationi- 
articulato ; Geranium triste Cornuti ; Scam- 
Rhodensis; Ornithopodium Granul. Dalech. 
St. Peter’s church is a fair building, 
There are many supreme lords, who 
gentlemen of decay’d fortunes, &c. have 
Rhododendron Alpinum ; Bellis fol. inciso ; 
returned to the palace in the fame order 
d to a ftrong beam 
own direction ; the bones of the ear in a 
for a pistole apiece. In one shop we saw 
was another fire-work, and in the great 
death they made this: one Lucinda being Anno mociiu. menfe Offobri die xvi1 
us to this night’s lodging at Borgogne, 
the ladder, kissing every step he went up, 
pressing in colours the true figures of the 
Nigh this church is a little house where 
lecture here. 
as he pleases ex. gr. When a benefice is 
The pictures of faith, hope, charity, and 
of Saxony, who pretended his right from a 
professors in all faculties read lectures. 
which are citizens, who watch, sixteen at 
 
crowded day and night with a multitude 
store of cannon are ready planted on the 
they came. 
the pedestal inscriptions, one of which is 
with thofe of S. Antonio at Padua) which cans 
mafs began, the two organs (one on 
duke, who kifs’d it, After this, another 
belonging to the gunners, and in a larger 
ministers presiding by turns. This pref- 
The Seminarium hath a stately large 
than the heads, whereas the reverses seem to be done by an unexpe- 
first entred, 1. Gelderland. 2. Zutphen. 
called, to consider things that they are to 
The patriarch of Venice’s palace is ad- 
is made of mosaick work, and underneath 
land, and by Romerswal. About half an 
The English have a church there. An Englith 
ders ; and in this procession the copy of 
guilla; 45. Pignoletté; 46. Orada Vec- 
minister’s merit and the prince’s discre- 
quantity of silk is made here, which they 
Sturio; 6. Joro; 7. Rhombo; 8. Pa- 
The prince elector palatin appoints a 
efcit. ; : 
where any one that is to be banished, 
The well-educated among the Athenians appear to have indeed 
patrons of Padua, whose feast is 24 Dec. 
reputed an ingenious scholar, skill’d in 
In the senate-house, we observ’d in 
notice of the government of this common- of the 7 
One evening (the usual time for execu-
only for support. He said, he could 
We went to the burg described in 
three beards. 
Every Saturday there is a market kept 
are 1891 honses, and 10,744 inhabitants. 
arms, contrary to their liberties he had 
the fide of the altar, The nuncio and 
we left the walls of Crema, we paid five 
quattrines, &c. the coin of these two 
Every hour of the night a fellow blows 
tome of Roman antiquities. 
cardinal Bessarion, and this written, 
2. Newburgh, who lately did homage to 
devotion, in their books. 
veil’d and led by old women to church, 
Palatine houfe, 1. the duke of Simeran, 
banked in. 
of citizens are chosen, before whom dif 
trouble of searching, having no forfeitable 
3. Sufanna wxor Arnulphi, iia Beren- 
that branch out with the names of the 
which we observ’d some miles distance 
March 24. We had a very difficult 
altar now stands in, the walls whereof 
heads, with red lead, &c. the manuscripts 
On a pillar hangs a table with thefe 
side. Unguis Alcis Ind. lachrymal urns ; 
of St. Be- 
Prima bifogna calcinarla fin che fi vede ufcire 
stine’s works in several manuscript vo- 
This prince’s effigie lies on a fair mo- 
Middleburg. There are two land-gates. 
SKIPPoON. 
Hyppolita Blanchina ejus conjuge ab eoqs 
was one making a speech. 
great shout. Nigh the viceroy’s palace, 
to relieve the others in case of necessity. 
trees on each side. We walk’d the works, 
the Rotunda, having a cupola in the mid- mus. 
which, chief merchants and citizens live ; 
tine, and in the midst of it is an island, 
gogne, three out of one terra, and two 
horses teeth, a whale’s penis, a trumpet 
faded gilding, which was not unusual among the ancients *. Though  
ded into lesser. Each hath its inspector, who 
Of what is taken at sea, a fifth part 
All this festival 500 sbirri kept guard in 
nico Mag- cloister, where they shew’d us the cell 
votes. 
the blessing, the organ, voices and instru- 
an hospital dedicated to S. John Baptist 
streets are pav’d with stone in the middle, 
ing wound up at g, on the axis at d, the Turcarum cuniculis lacerata Creta 
father; the duke of Newburg, who mar- 
growing Arundo nastos five farata, in ripis 
and grind it with a stone, (as apples with 
mers, bastard wenches, or poor girls, 
knees. 
ready. The marquis’s son was publish’d 
and Charles V. emperor. 
gardens are very neat, having two large 
procession, and we took notice of one or- 
the provinces withdrawing from that pa- 
53- Pifcis anguillaformis; 54. Sorghé 
a Theatin, a Franciscan of S. Anton. di 
The front or west end of the church is 
saw a pleasant garden, delightful walks, 
body of S. Catherine, who was placed on 
devoutly repeating that prayer to them- 
Charles duke of Croyerected many monu- 
the arms of Frankendal, which was stampt 
dragons teeth, i.e. the petrified teeth of 
which we entred again. Two miles 
His effigies, and a sea-fight, is well 
the family, the king of Spain came to be 
were glewed to smooth boards white- 
men and a boy, and with a good wind, Reggio in 
parts separately, as the head, the nose, &c. of this statue, with those of 
July 20. we went by waggon a German 
We heard one day (17 October) a law- 
may be raifed higher or lower in the wa- Interfecit 
lecture. In another school, a friar was 
and went undera wooden bridge at S’ta 
This day on the three high poles before 
The Jesuits college was visited by us, 
handsome monuments, and writ out some 
mallus myrsenites ex Ragusa ;  Abelmosch 
cliff to the N.W. and S.E. and at the point 
are in this palace. 
very pleasant prospect of Maestricht, the 
part of an AEgyptian queen ; a fparrow 
We obferved one day a funeral pafling 
of four famous men, and inscriptions 
a horse) that were very good; and after 
caused them to be made, and intended a 
church-yard lies a great heap of fkulls. 
we rode by Vivenan, where there is a 
lici, Turc. German. Gall. Geld. Ital. 
was done, many of the people stay’d a 
very large and handsome, having double 
ved in brass. 
lect. 
tar on the left side of the entrance into 
They make here several sorts of sweet 
round by a horse, and to 15 or 16 lb. put 
ster, whereon they sleep in the summer 
not yet undergone the artist’s last touches, and consequently this should 
wood. Some of the box work is cut in- 
with statues and inscriptions. Three in- 
thus empty’d feveral times in an hour. Martinenghi Vitturi. 
by Sanfovinus, who defcribes the city of 
thecary intended to print in his catalogue 
Paderno, not far from this city. He told “/##- 
new testament and psalms are printed in 
landed, plotted to poison the other two ; 
and shap’d into anvils, anchors, &c. the 
in Curia Hollandiae, 75 florins in supremo
a piece of an elephant’s tooth petrified ; 
bring beef, veal, lamb, wine, snow from 
except those which in some places he or- 
shop were two or three figures covered 
the queen talking privately together, dif- D. M. Procuratores ex Teftamento 
magistrates,and after them the chief traders 
at Messina, called the Priorato of S. John, 
stened to it, repeat aloud what was first 
building frequented by few students. 
Here is a pretty stadthouse at the mar- 
observing the conditional oath he took, 
Geran. medica peltata; Bellis Ind. maxima ; 
The buildings of this city are large; but 
Here they make pretty straw-boxes. 
Burgundy. The arms of the house of 
the gentlemen, who meet once a year, 
choir is raised up many steps. In the south 
tions, one to Clement VII. the other to 
This place was formerly a void space 
in this piazza. 
The arms of the town is a pitcher. With- 
bodies, which Van Horne esteemed not 
or two, and an hour and half’s distance 
maintained till day of marriage, &c. 
of the epitaphs, viz. 
birth ; in the church are preserved the 
ren, int he night will put them in at 
pictures of sea-fights, one at the streights 
valued at 400 doppie, and a large scollop 
streets are neat, handsomly built, with 
In the great church we view’d several 
building, and a large garden. In N. Dame 
scription now (as is mention’d by Schottus 
fenny, but as we went up stream the 
3. Holland. 4. Zealand. 5. Utrecht. 
very bad, the country being a fenny and 
warks, with a line without the ditch, and 
weed, with his face covered (only two holes 
The streets of Bredah are well built. 
There are four gildsin this city, 1. of Gild. 
building, we difcours’d with one Greene fejuits. 
mayor, a chancellor, seven fcabins, and 
upon pledges brought in by the poor, &c. 
pedagogue) aliquid in omnibus, nihil in toto; vanity, however, 
which are return’d again to the stadt- 
An. S. MDLXXVIE 
I transcrib’d that which was made for 
piece of sculpture ; but it rather appears to have been common to this 
cerns not the presbytery. They can make 
palace. 
an iron gun beaten out by the hammer. 
defign laid to abufe the memory of our Hine a Cretenfi fenatu populog; 
with cannon, and all sorts of warlike in- 
D.O.M. R’de@ Moniales S’mi corporis 
Primum ortum dederat terra Brabanta 
vinus shew’d us his study left him by 
They teach young gentlewomen to fing, 
when they were beaten out by Soliman 
of the prince of Orange (who is marquis provincial
costa viridi ; Hieracium fol. sanguineo ; Con- 
attention. Mr. Richardson has also observed the same defect and dif- 
up in a monk’s habit (with which it was 
are the monuments of several bishops, some 
under the sum of 600 florins. 
also inscriptions. A coat of arms here 
professor, and none but a stranger can 
prius 5 
1581, 26 July, that the king of Spain had 
turned, and placed himfelf in that part of 
ral infects, which Corvinus confessed him- 
like iron ; Pefce Suillo, having a high back, 
in England, being hot enough to boil an 
a reasonable rate, though most of it is 
riczea, 3. Goes, 4. Tola, 5. Flissing, 6. Vere ; 
back, and fpade and fcoop are lifted up Patri femper falus 
were in view of Redemptor’s church, and 
work ; and lower down, at each corner, 
over a large mud-boat, and immediately Religione, Conjilio, Pietate, 
will be calcined enough in three or four 
Dania me coluit, pulfam Germania videt, 
were in possession of from 1308 till 1522, 
Reus, a narrow stream that runs to Mal- 
day. They fay their matins over-night 
The monument itself is a square almost 
statues in memory of them. Not far 
Such as are taken into the order, must 
trench’d about ; formerly it was consi- 
Suetiz, Noruegiz, Gothorum, Scla- 
libras mille eifdem folutas a perilluftri D. 
When any boat enters the haven with 
Nigh this hangs another writing, viz. 
The iron work of this engine coft (they Toto Atgeo profugas egit 
In Milan there are many jewellers, who 
continued strait for five miles more; and 
place ; and in the middle of it is paved 
keep the shore from being wash’d in. 
hang over so, that the rain might not 
we were civilly entertained by him, and 
seniority. They lodge, where they please, 
infcriptions over the feveral pictures, viz. 
plac’d where every muscle ran; an exact 
where botanick lectures are read, and 
in poluere e V’impafta 0 col chiaro di uoua o 
Adi vit Marco mpevur Lill’mi SSri Pri alla fanta fano publicate intender che non enthi 
ships, and the admiral elects one out of 
wood-work. 25 monks here. 
rain and thunder, and at night the same 
rious large fountain, with the figure of a 
one arch, made of wood, after this man- 
minera purp. Argenti ex Polonia ; a cru- 
Machoy, with two teeth before in the 
peoples charity in a bag at the end of a 
is written, 
the last, viz. 
keep a court. Here are two English 
and letters of credit further than their va- 
Funcral. 
Maestricht.) A fentinel opening a gate, 
full proportion, excellently well made, 
alfo in love with E/fex, the feeing him and Aloyfius et Petrus 
tapers are given by the deceafed’s friends. 
bach, 5. Dela petit Pierre, 
left page, is written Croy: on the right 
cup of one entire piece of crystal, that held 
The women in the Engadine wear 
meanly built ; it calls itself Citta fedele. 
was besieged. Over the gate of the burg 
cages: For the country people bring 
upon part of a tongue of land, between 
in a room nigh the Sala di grand Consiglio, 
united ; and they declared in the year 
charged a piftol at the queen, for which Commiffarii, magno Patruo 
Scepperus perpetuum monumentum. 
We observ’d the houses here,at Middleburg, 
chymist, the Lapis Bononiensis, five Phos- 
pedal dell? incurabili on the right hand, we 
Al Journey thro’ Part of the 
upon such notice, either neglects it alto-
roofs of this church. 
mas day, Sti. Novo, the duke, &c. go in Veneto imperio in una Urbe 
about, having some few soldiers of the 
formam reftituerunt Anno mpxcvt. 
the right hand, which is a small, but a 
fair portico towards the ftreet, the walls” “%* 
The houses are generally low built, and 
un fudore come fi vede ufcire dall’Uoua 
entred Flushing, and viewed the fortifica- 
the annunciation ; over it is written, 
Malva alp. fol. lacin. Doronicum variega- 
In this room doctors of law are made; 
In one Cliver’s house we saw these ra- 
Two of the walls bulwarks have large 
of 30 in some cities, &c. according to 
places being current. 
inscriptions under the stories, viz. 
grant of the emperor, that he should fuc- 
cretary, 
Without the works stands a mark to 
hath two pillars in a leaning posture, 
They have great square tables made 
small ; it hath a broad and fair market- 
fish-ponds in them; curious shades are 
tronum. 
of Charity, Prudence, Temperance, and 
vinces under the power of a Spanish ty- 
26th of Auguft, 1660. Madame Man- 
the same privileges were bestowed upon it 
the Revelations, with a finging tone, ina 
and much rougher skin than thesea-dogs ; 
each side of it is a portico with marble 
Aloyfio Mocenico Dr. Willughby and Mr. Swale, a York- 
on pieces of gold and silver money in the 
the high-street which brings to the cathe- The cathe- 
Under one of the city bridges is a school 
off at sea when we came from Catania. 
pleasantly seated among shades of trees 
independant on the prince Palatine, ac- 
citizens, who are chosen for life. They 
S. Theodore, some say, was formerly S. Theo- 
cluded and agreed that the duke of New- 
only to the prince, who confers honours ; 
fix deputies from, 1. Middleburg, 2. Zi- 
the bottom of the fpiral is a very thick Ex unguibus hoftium evulfit 
are brass copies of the virgin Mary’s, and 
from Adam, to the last duke: At the be- 
of the roof ) a flaggon, whereon was writ- 
place (part of which is built) like that at 
Peftilentia cepit 
the canons who miniitred to the prieft 
two fair channels and broad keys within 
in.
from Peschiera. Near Soncin we ferry’d 
hath a roof carved with popes arms and 
under the palace; and on it hung the 
family. Afterwards every seat hath the 
bus ante facrum corpus B. Catherinae 
The Collegium Helveticum hath a fair Collegium 
Balsamum grew in. He called his embalm- 
white marble ; an altar-table is supported 
nelius (who wrote the progymnasmata) 
shew’d us a skeleton curiously whitened, 
scriptions are under the picture of Fran- 
ders immediately to be paid to the mi- 
sledges are changed, other persons drive 
Another large skeleton of a man, cu- 
mentioned in Schottus. Under the choir 
In the markets are sold many birds, viz. 
out them, a curious breast-work or coun-
(at this time) gilt and painted rails 
large gardens full of fruit trees. Great 
close by. The poor people have little 
an oval figure: 3. Mustachin Negro: 4. 
a stone in some parts of England) mov’d 
neat little chapel; where are four hand- 
mum Beroum de folutione aut. inftrum. {crip- 
and set exactly together by his own hand; 
A large cupola in this church, with a 
a point of an iflandon the left hand ; and 
middle ; at the beginning of each of the 
About noon we went into the passage 
Under a picture of Messina with her 
upper jaw, and four grinders on each 
The fool in the play kifs’d the queen. 
humility stand on each side of the same 
having two spiral alabaster pillars fo trans- 
landen van Walcheren, consisting of a de- 
following inscription under a head, viz. 
count of. In the same isle is a fair tomb 
of the prince of Orange’s pleasure-houses, his plea- 
mus Justinianus, wad Joan. Venerius, have 
mise of amendment for the future. 
by patacoons and wispenies. 
frumentaria Prafecti in bane meliorem 
poverty and obedience. None can wear 
a pretty building; the key is fair, having 
A journey thro’ Part of the 
morning from mass. Some of the Pa- 
hour after fupper, is allotted them for 
nunnery ; and on the right hand was the 
4.96 
ris; 11. Volpine; 12. Pafflere; 13. Zuae 
{moaked with an incenfe pot; then a re- 
Mal-Albergo, we remov’d into a larger 
On Corpus Christi day, was a great 
The cathedral church is an indifferent 
no fault in the first sentence. 
playing allthe time. ‘Then the duke re- 
by these inscriptions following, viz. 
kill’d his wife: the gallows was erected 
corps, which is laid upon a bier drefs’d 
fault before the congregation, and a pro- 
where are feveral infcriptions mentioned 
when one dies, the church he belong’d to 
of the church is square, and the relicks 
An upper lieutenant, whose name is 
from whence we had a prospect of a great 
preserv’d like an host in a pyxis, being set 
The roof of the church hath five Cupoli, 
flo. guttata duae species ; Dorycnium argen- 
fluvium praedict. Linum fol. angusto gramineo, 
and a half to a village called Laufdun, fa- 
fcription ; 
the place. 
which we pass’d. On a small pyramidal 
knights dwell. Abela, in his description 
phorus Kircheri, whichis naturally whitith, Benes 
There are many others which we were 
The first is Faith, with a church in one 
the clergy, divorces, &c are heard. The 
gen, 1594, 23 July. At the union 158I, 
ers are of walnut wood ; we observed here 
to whom is joyn’d the pensioner and se- 
took notice of sol. saugu. Draconis, Leonto- 
no church censure, without they first send 
bellows and hammers are mov’d by four 
all referring to the V. Mary’s pretended 
earth-works handsomly pallisado’d and 
churches, and a French church. The 
The house of Facob Fuggerus. His wi- jacob 
ing wheels, &c.) of a great heighth, be- 
marina ; 
steeple we had a good prospect of the 
right hand, and S’ta Lucia; and at the 
inscriptions (two in escutcheon, and one 
and lay it ina press, where the oil is forced 
painted ; and over the altar the roof is 
open’d ; then follow’d a crucifix, and 
tall houses, not inferior to those in Ant- 
Here are three reformed churches, the 
a cross on their left shoulder, and a silver 
laid work. Under his own picture is 
money, which they had of their receiver, 
The fcoop being full of mud, and fhut Hic Maris Mars; Terre Terror 
the round of the town; and just under the 
stine friars, where is a little chapel nigh 
being lately extinct, wars arose between 
discerned thro' them. These, they re- 
cup of crystal, worth 40 doppie, another 
to himself the episcopal power, he only 
the territories of other princes. 
and. went ashore, whence we walk’d an 
Fo’en. Francifcum Beriatium et Hierony- 
are long poles; ex. gr. a 0 isa pole fix’d Othomanarum navium Moderatorem 
hath preserved the Intestina in situ. A 
disguise went for England. 
arms of an English cardinal, viz. the 
Over the entrance to the mint-house is 
the thunder and rain continued, and the 
island. They have a secretary. 
quiry little satisfaction could be given. 
Ne molem quam cernis : : J ; t 
The temple of Romulus and Remus, is Temple of 
The old stadthouse hath fair pictures 
lue extends. 
Here we faw many classes of books ; 
ing. 
Templum Saturni, or the AErarium, is Templum 
Vrbem dira peftilentia xvx 
&c. upon the masts, sails, &c. which 
spector differs not from the other mini- 
Ut primum exoptatam egris afferre falutem 
Thursday, October 12. being all-faints 
Every Sunday morning there is a fer- 
admiral, and all the rest is distributed 
makes up the deficiency of knowledge: the Athenians and the 
fol. Doronicum non varieg. Thlaspi fol. sedi ; 
cakes, viz. I. Cu..gon, shap’d like a 
thoine, a great favourite of Philip duke of 
each fide of the altar) play’d, and the 
cumcifion-knife made of a blueish stone, 
hanc tabulam fuis fumptibus erigi curavit. 
fruits, viz. Gazobea Brasil. Pomum Ind. 
infcription on the wall. 
distance without the walls is a chapel, 
evening a servant of our lodging went 
outside, sentences and the owner’s name 
front, and two courts which will be very Helveti- 
Lftrians hands. An Venetum Aloyfium, 
fenting our Saviour, sheep, &e. 
scrib’d, 
The white signifies the insertion of a 
holy water in a filver thing, which he 
easily beat in. One of the water-ports is 
the waters is saltish; at the opening of the 
had at the Spaw, and travelled through a 
Mezore /imilis, pennis duabus inter oculos ; 
gure. The chiming wheel is great and 
Clematis Cretica Clusii smilaci asperae (verum 
them ; Locusta Cornuta terrestris ; Gryllo- 
tion, the prince Palatine hath feized on 
hic in facello divi Laurentii tumulatus. 
col oglio di lino. 
They were first call’d hospitalieri, from 
stakes in them, wherein hemp is wretted ; 
Provifores {alutis. 
Knatchbull’s fitter, is the abbefs. There 
the Athenian owl, is placed upon the finger; and a paper, adorned 
Huc per Civium lachrymas advettus eft The ear! of Cafflemain, Mr. Fames Pal- 
which feels like a fungus, and rebounds 
fepultus. 
brought out of Sicily; whence they 
Skippon. Friseland hath also a college at Harling, 
and high wall, a deep ditch cut into the 
very rarely carv’d ; and one of the altars 
On another stone is inscrib’d, 
Vor. VI. ON Mr, 
from those in the upper Engadine. The 
not very favourable) we came to the be- 
his hand, and over him is written, 
void, the Concilium Ecclesiasticum nomi- 
There were not above 12 or 14 Jesuits 
emperor. The like jurisdictions are in 
windows are like loop-holes. 
Lutherans churches, where we observed 
a trangular figure, a triangle stone being 
za rounded with a portico full of stalls, 
D. Carolo V. Imp. Cef: Aug. Pio, Fe- 
muyden, brought us back to Middleburg. 
Most of the people understand and 
made. Then the way bent a little, but 
VOL. VI. 
grinding of crystal they first use smiris and 
urbi fue Flandrie Max. feliciter in- 
a man’s heighth. Upon this is a cheft or 
In several places of the city are many 
platforms. 
tween two birds in a chief. 
entrance, a most curious picture of St. 
At the east end of it is the figure of 
Filius Baro de Croy & Aranis, & An- 
These colleges name the captains of 
and hereabouts are paper and iron mills : 
belonging to a french convent, where 
Another fair monument with several 
third of malefactors estates. 
built, having an angel on the top, and 
who, being left on shipboard, conspired 
place: their habit is black. One of them 
the grand canal, we went under Ponte 
e Ras; and where Ca. S. Elmo is, La 
where women of quality are cloister’d, and gina. 
Over this figure is a picture of the Tri- 
florins, in the lesser cities, 150 florins, 
for some days, and his fingers were so 
hand. At the west end. is the statue of 
two brass basons they were baptized in, 
the water is conveyed by troughs to the 
crowded our luggage in a little cart or 
Vicarius, the chancellor, vice-chancellor, 
notaries sit, which is called Spelunca La- 
full of bread, rice, &c. for the prisoners. 
On Thurfday, Offober 15. we took a 
other magistrates. 
florins value are adjudged ; in towns, 20 judicature. 
iron hook at 8, and dis a rope, which be- Catenis oneravit 
two uppermost are Hemor and Boras,the two 
Ray’s and my collection. 
ners, furplice-men finging before the 
They expect 2 removal toa better place. 
ned with ceruffa; which boards he 
way, which brought us thro’ Lorzi Vec- 
ference of work in the little children of the river Nile, in the Vatican 
received pratique, and then they 
linseed, walnut and rape oil: First, they 
497, 
light, which will clearly be difcerned as 
the sides of the hill; and then we came 
we faw. Madame Kuatchbull, Sir Norion 
In the cloister or portico of the palace 
thing remarkable, he repeated the words 
had Malta given them ; Clement VII. be- 
by their inscriptions, viz. Digito scribe- 
The delegates are for the most part 
and candles good store, and paper lant- 
nets, by a great noise we observed the 
lesser cities of Velow. II. Most of the 
strum Avis Serrae ; the black and white 
Nephew to Dr. Petrus Castellus Romanus 
miles from Messina. It is a bishop’s fee, 
S. Onuphrio is on the M. Janiculus ; 
most of the streets. 
with bricks set edge-ways, and so are 
work, which was an imitation of flowers 
riously coloured with black and white. 
Many in Padua think the marquis him- 
stows it on one of them, or commands 
in earum Ecclef. celebrari facere anni- 
egg; the springs are very plentiful, and 
viceroy four, who answered also with 
monea Syriaca ; Polytrichum Alp. inciso fol. 
The figure of this monument is en- 
the name of the Princess of Wales graces the list of members. 
bours and four statues of goddesses in the 
Over a tomb-ftone in the wall is this 
Vandyke ; the king and queen of Bohemia ; 
ingham, earl of Leicester, countess of 
serve grapes in all winter, which have 
A Journey thro’ Part of the 
The feast of The feast of the letter continued for 
cification, the union at Utrecht was made 
in red liveries, next came six trumpets in 
and a little crucifix lying by the body. 
long, and 380 broad. The streets, not 
Patrum Pietas liberavit 
nifestly consist of three bones, Dr. Van 
men in purple gowns : an antient gentle- 
the spleen, and at last enters the passage 
library ; this institution is supported by the subscriptions of those 
come some delegates from, 1. Woerden, 
scheme of the spermatick veins, testes, 
The peasants seen in the market of Athens are nearly all 
a dolphin’s in Bellonius, sea wolf, sea por- 
By these competitors the Hollanders and 
south side, 1. Cowarern, and Hamalle. 
At the upper end of one room is a statue 
a general, but a very superficial knowledge : in literature they are 
and six or seven figures of men and women 
Over her head is written, Regui Caput. 
wooden house pitch’d over, where the 
have another little house, who are ready 
S. N.) enshrined in a marble altar, have- 
chambers are richly gilt, and the planch- 
not affect his reputation. The fame observation possibly might be made 
but seems to be a poor place, and is 
body seem to lessen, if not totally to prevent, fo deep a partition. The 
The people did not turn their faces to the 
on the right-hand, without joints ; but it is manifest that the hands had 
garrison consists of five companies, two of 
made of iron. 
are 12 cross streets, all running in strait 
Wilder, is governor of Frankendal: the 
and Nevan, a castle of the king of Spain’s. 
over a little furnace of wood fire, and 
he kneeled a while before St. Mark’s al- 
round about ; the portici have double 
and Pietresem. 4. Wesemale, and Rotre- 
a voluntary resignation of his government
among the seamen, &c. 
On one side is this inscription ; 
the same habit, with broad red hats and 
Lusenbourgh and Lesbans; in the sourth, 
this inscription : 
Menfium trattu vexatam 
An old tomb there of Vraw Margarete 
bono Deo volente, calo favente, butc 
nature with those of Burcet. The taste of 
lent us twenty pounds, tho’ he never saw 
srellaris preserved so in another glass ; 
on the fifth or dolphin at the side of the statue, on which some boys seem 
they say, St. Jobn Baptist’s head was cut 
must stand in the view of all people. 
flowers curiously done by him; exotick 
inscriptions, pictures, &c. All this night 
before we enter’d a wall that encompasses a 
27. Cancer birf. 28, Cancer parvus viri- 
high; also works and a trench of water. 
crystal ; they fell crystal stugio’s (tweesers) 
winter usually lasts six months at least. 
Accipe, Sin memori feriptarecondere finu, 
a protestant ferra. 
broke two glasses ; the nut, he said, the 
written Divo Car. V. Caef. and Moneta. 
the entrance stand four brass horses in the 
legate and a vice-legate, sent by the pope. 
wherein are three holes, one at the virgin’s 
breast, the other two under our Saviour’s 
Which letters are in many places of the 
Neptune, and four angels: Over the en- 
picture of one of the family over it; in 
and deans of cathedrals fit: after a little 
written here, in memory of Taffus the 
tiff. vittori ac triumphatori perpetuo 
times 800 children at nurse, &c. An 
figure. 
March 25. We travelled thro’ Aban, 
Malting is a great trade in this town. 
in this place; that order being little re- 
written, 
formerly at Dockum, consisting of four 
The twelve magistrates chuse a burgo- 
an hour and an half, and they go to fup- 
government of it for 900 years, but the 
Fortitude. 
painted on the out-side, with these two 
nedict. 
are about 17000 fighting men of the pro- 
house ; which is well water’d about, and 
in the city. 
ticks. He seem’d to be somewhat discon- 
discours'd with them in the midst of his 
at this time at the Hague. 
alius viridis parvus, av 28. fem.? 44, An- 
quarter, and two from each jurisdiction, 
left shoulder a white cross of this 
popish 
ad plagam meridionalem fepelita, 
we were told that there being no issue of 
they are seven, in others nine, who sit 
codiles, unicorns horns, zeloo a fish, jaws 
4. Baldwinus Barbatus, Filius Arnul- 
We walk’d up one ascent, where are 
the citadel is also very strong, wherein is 
we travell’d a fair and strait way for four 
10 proc, et S. proS* Prov’. 
submitted himself to the pope. No in- 
port, did belong to Solomon’s temple. 
walk’d on a high bank by the sea-shore, 
wise’s death ; but to the best of our en- 
ing of one arch, the roof whereof is cu- 
ef Aloyfius lifoman, is carving a monument for Aloy- elmo Samuelli were my merchants. 
a tower called /a Donna di mar, built on 
Middleburg, one Flissing, one Veere, and 
and moving the rope over the pully O, Cives illius exemplo 
with us to the cardinal’s palace, and took 
many curious shells, &c. 
with great kindness and civility, and 
The stadthouse is a neat, compact and 
pieces of damafk over their left fhoulders. 
High Dutch man scout or ratsheeren, who 
S. Andrea della Valle, is a church 
fecurae, which are some of them subdivi- 
some of which I transcrib’d, viz. 
We saw no tradesmens shops besides 
led Curia Hollandica, and then before the 
the screw ii, and forces down a heavy 
at least the bend of the arms, and the inclination of the upper part of the 
reads mathematicks, In a handsome small 
Mark lifting up his hand to heaven. It 
among which we were shewn St. Augu- 
own temporal and the church revenues. 
At Cavaliero Franc. Corvino's musaeum, 
mination. 
school, where Thomas Aquinas us'd to 
buried) having the hands and face naked, 
Note, The pool which receives the 
&c. and afterwards we heard he made a 
tower, an inn of good entertainment and 
(representing persons in the sacred story) 
Francifco Morofini. In a piazza here is a 
of water between two very long streets ; 
saw here) who was employed by the earl 
x1l Kal, Sext. 
when they pleafe. We faw fome of their 
This ftone beaten to powder and, 
The dress of the Albanian peasant is coarse and dirty; a canvas 
appeal for Mastricht, Grave, Steeneberg, Eindhoven, 
silver hatbands ; then follow’d some of the 
g the’ 
never observe any Anastomoses between 
the cure of hemorrhoids. 
One Giudice de Savii, 
The domo is a very mean church: the 
some channels with broad keys within the 
plants. And fix miles off is S. Agatha, a 
title to it ; one family succeeded in the 
quietis Aufpici D. N. Principi poten- 
sented by an old man with three faces and 
This following inscription was also 
ab ipso inventa prope Rhenum Bonon
over the concomitant ornaments, as not deserving much time and 
ry's letter. 
perill. D. Anibalis Paleotti quibus reliquit 
about eight leagues from Middleburg. 
and a large fish-pond. 
&c. the bones found in the glandula pi- 
to Cush; in the second are 30 names, the 
court constituted at the Hague 1591. which 
bone. 
embaffadors us’d to lodge ; afterwards 
May 23. There was a great deal of 
straw houses, where they sit and bathe 
In the portico of St. Mark’s church is 
them, that so several may have the be- 
with walls, &c. Without the walls are 
noisseurs agree that the head is rather too small in proportion to the 
having red caps, on each of which was 
 shew’d us many dry’d plants, which 
wood, and in four hours space came to a 
on each side, and enter’d a small bark of 
whereof is written, ; 
her feet, and this written, 
Minfbul, who gave usa printed paper of 
c, which is put into 
This is a strong place well fortified with 
in too much haste to take a particular ac- 
us the way to prepare it to receive light, ag 
statue of pope Gregory XIII. blessing with 
Chiara, then by St. Andrea, and thro” a 
The Palatinate is divided into 13 Prae- 
and after that, they put it into a hair cloth, 
and bought our own provision. This 
marquis of Brandenburg, Mark and Cleve. 
Aken, ona hill is a great village called 
make cable-ropes. 
the choir, is this written, 
thefe following, viz. 
La Salute. 
The emperor hath nothing to do with 
The prince Palatine and the duke of 
little statues of brass, viz. 
horns hung from most windows ; upon 
the prince Palatine, 3. Dupont, 4. Swols- 
returns not by veins into the spleen, but 
S. Spirito is a fair and large hospital, 
S. Dominico Maggiore, is a Dominican 
a long and handfome stone building ; the sure houses 
Brabant. may appeal in trials about titles, to a 
Corpus Chrijti is a nnnnery of the order alt 
cifix made of red, yellow, white and 
St. Mark’s church, were hung up three 
muscle, and figures and characters are 
The third, Charity treading upon He- 
or two before they eat them. 
tale; 50, Tinca marina; 51. Donzella ; 
country. 
lions. Schottus, in his itinerary, makes 
prayer, at the conclusion of his first pray- 
Aquarius, 
Marique horam tenuit, fed Venus ipfa 
sem. 
and standing there about a quarter of an 
lace, is a statue of D. Fuscari kneeling 
In this city we saw the manner of making 
dix Contrayerve cum foliis ; Aurum po- 
boat is raifed higher. Per murorum hiatus 
ladies in coaches rode the Corso or tour 
fpace of time four canons came to him, 
Lucemburgenfium Ducis, bic qui- 
to his son Philip VI. of Spain, who not 
beam ee, that lies upon a bag of seed upon 
on a little marble monument) to English- 
country. About 800 were now residing 
and have then 100 fcudi given them. 
Horne told us his opinion, That the blood 
design’d to be built on the steeple, but the 
poet ; 
profession. 
Amidst the admiration of all ages, and the resort of curious persons Criticisms on 
Rialto, and fome diftance further, by a 
and if any one is unsatisfied with their 
first place we saw vineyards planted on 
hours we reach’d Rotterdam, three leagues Rotter- 
Every time boats go off to Rotterdam, 
veins and arteries, but between the 
and in the other, nigh the palace, many 
planched with walnut wood inlaid. The 
hath most power, and is in office quamdiu 
a great stone in the pavement, whereon 
In the absence of these states there is a 
Twelve guns here called the 12 months. 
man; the Vertebrae of a faetus, which ma- 
to be riding, were it not known that many of the admirable pieces of 
tar, and looking death in the face. Be- 
SKIPPON. town is not large: there is a pretty market- 
On the other side are two large inscrip- 
hall of the podesta’s house, which was 
created A. D, 618, till the fifty third 
another procession ; after the drummers 
the church-rents is given in stipends, 
ranny and bloody inquisition by force of 
and pieces of bacon, &c. hung very thick. 
each side the way repeating their prayers 
came by /a Salute, a round church fairly 
we were entertained by them, and an 
lisk, and a triumphant pillar, with in- 
duét (built of brick upon arches) about #«é. 
May 24. Was the great feast day so- 
untill’d ground, full of shrubby woods. 
having a large brass crown that hangs 
Erardus de Marca kneeling against an al- 
We faw on the 22d Fan. being Candle- Fhoftes percecidit, fugavit 
Nigh the piazza del Capitaneo, is a fair 
church, stands a thick and short pillar, 
The Studio or schools, is an unfinished 
the front curioufly adorned with marble 
room, several antient statues and heads ; 
At cardinal Rondine’s palace is the 
a handsome portico in the front, whereon  
Towards the sea-side it is well fortified 
gondola at the fifhmarket near the piazza 
pillars and rails of a red colour, and below 
 
much disturb’d after dinner by great 
We pass’d through about ten fluices or 
delegates, which attend matters of money 
boat, and after six hours (the wind being 
mingled with Minium plaitter, is ufed for 
other parts of the body, and particularly the hips ; some find fault with 
able to distinguish clearly between their 
and curious scheme of all the Vasa in the 
now a church dedicated to S. Adrian. Saturni- 
ani II. Imp. Fil. 8 Wabella Clara Eu- 
bitrate between the inhabitants and pre- 
clementifime Cornelius Duplicius 
five spartum Col. Adianthum nigrum Canad. 
duke of Austria who made his pretences. 
The podesta’s of the Valteline have the 
Here are preserv’d three old figures.
also papists. None of them pay more 
Dunkirk) and Madame Monfon, and Ma- 
graven in the title page of Boissard’s second 
the hall a great many pictures explain’d 
is a fair and large library, having over 
fhallow water by St. Marta, where we 
On the south side of this tomb are three 
The city and cardinal legates armories 
on a high bank, having a fenny country 
Campo di Fiore is a large market-place. 
where they communicated. Six of these 
rins, some of the richest and better sort 
rations, and must swear before the gran 
large open rooms round about; in one of 
Within the walls of Aken, nigh the 
the Labyrinthus, Cochlea, Tympanum, Mal. 
fied: but there is a penalty of 40 florins 
several baths ; a current of cold water runs 
the government, and stifle controversies, 
own hand ; another book of plants and 
down in the middle of it. Under an al- 
Juft before it went a mourner in a friar’s 
mills, which are turn’d by horses. 
The knights of Malta have a church 
scription. 
We bought of one Gioseppe Bucerni, a Skippon. 
D. Marci Procuratori foire papift, ftudents of Padua. 
When G is down the fpiral, the maft D. Demetri propugnacula 
banc 
with Richard Trevor Conf. Anglus, written 
3. Livy, with a book wherein is written, 
some statues, each having an inscription, 
work; the walls and pillars are of marble. 
Charles I. and queen Mary, drawn by 
ruptures. Rofa Sinensis, Malvae species ; Su- 
In a little chapel on the south side, is a 
August 23.( Sunday) we went to one of the 
which are on this side very strong and 
VOL. VI. 
prince Cardinal ; the king of Spain. The 
and handsomely plaister’d over ; on the 
perpaiola’s of Parma, or a Venetian livre, 
reading divinity. 
adorned with carved work; and over 
one side of the exchange is a cloister: the 
A public school is established at Athens, to which is attached a 
a fair statue of Neptune. 
pillars; then pafiing by many gentlemens 
church of that name was a stage built, 
ecclesiastical affairs, formerly under the 
a bolletin, which allowed us to lodge in 
time of mafs. When all was done, they 
Spaniards possession, they being called in 
those commodities so to market. 
is pastor of some church, and who gives 
Albanians, a people totally distinct from the Greeks; their language 
volvulus Althaeae fol. non inciso ; Pentapbyl- 
idiom ; they have several dialects of it, 
time alive ; and the poison of it, he said, 
The Bancho, or exchange, is an open 
vitima Claffis Pani affervando dicata rei 
Venice. At is faid, the chair St. Peter us’d 
made a very fair shew ; which gallies 
duro & pungente ; Caryophyllus alp. repens; 
provincial West-Friseland are about 12 noblemen, 
They scatter earth on the snow, when 
May 23. All day and night the same 
Seer. 
Twenty-four monks belong to this 
Trifol. Americ. Cornicul. n. d. Papyrus 
curiously carved with the figure of little 
the states of the province of Holland at Dort 
Carlo’s statue in the streets a crucifix stand- 
mark’d at four equal distances by stones ; 
at Messina at three hours of the night ; 
Veere, fortified with a strong work and a Veere. 
which brought us up to Bergen op Zoome, 
kifs’d. There were many other foolifh 
S. Mark’s church belongs to the Augu- 
on the side of the altar. In this chapel is a 
MDCXXXI 
We visited Dr. Jo. Petrus Corvinus, 
ceremonies which were ufed durin 
another room for women, but at this time 
with other plants not described, this apo- 
and they have no fortified places. There 
We pass’d by the country houses of Jobn 
antiquity excel only in their capital parts, the judicious masters slurring 
fent 23 embaffies. 
The Jesuits is a pretty church, where 
chapel will be very rich, when finish’d. 
stick. At the end of the fermon the 
garded in the state of Venice, especially in 
 
in one of the hornworks, towards Worms, 
pillar, with a little figure on it, we read 
fingers are of an extraordinary length, and all, excepting the little finger 
kind of tart: 6. Armandole: 7. Coronea, 
The snow covered the country this 
at a long wooden bridge cross the Serio ; 
irons 5 and the whole fpiral-maft ftands in Adverfum Martem pati nefcias 
At one Henrick vander Burg’s, we saw a 
suls or burgomasters, who take care of 
down on his knees, and said the Lord’s 
7. Gant. 8 The nobility of Nimmegen. 
pus; 21; 22, 23. Echinorum mar. /pecies 
the Numisma was a crystal: on one side 
upwards, the {piral-maftftands ftrait. At D. Theodor Turluli munimenta 
his uncle, who in two quarto volumes, 
house is a school, and a grocer’s shop is 
of fire. I had this receipt alfo given me ; 
Ponte ; an hour and a half more brought 
gedy, wherein was much drollery, and a Tle regnum domuit, bie afferuit 
Several little square pieces of glass, be- 
lum lucidum fol. birs. ab ipso juventum prope 
In the evening, paying three stivers a 
(where we saw two fellows guarding with 
time we were here, very thick, and their 
The pavement of this church is curi- 
man was a servant to the old earl of Arun- 
sick are at dinner and supper. The 
information of businesses to the Concilium 
skeletons of embryo’s, wherein were 
steps curiously shaded with an arbour) is 
church, 
refused to take a pass to free us from the 
far from hence, noted for simples or rare 
affairs. 
large marble stone on the wall, whereon, 
kings of Hungary, to Johannes Marnij, 
protestants, chuse seven, and they elect 
 
The first entrance is a round place like and Re- 
Castellus was the first botanick prosessor 
senting, in mosaick work of little stones, 
glafed cloifter. Here is kept a fair re- 
their Shops, and in theSe booths, cheeses 
nights in the open air without prejudice, 
monument with four little statues on the 
and this night lodged in Gulich, being 
the city ditch ; which being dry, is al- 
of the city, each having a banner carried 
lions, having low brass rails about it. 
We saw St. Lambert's church, an old 
tented at many things in his own order, 
In another over several doors are effigies 
the person accused to the jurisdiction he 
soon arriv’d at Reggio in Calabria, 12 Calabria. 
and those in the lower speak differently 
(which had a pleasant ascent by stone 
an iron hollow, wherein it moves back- Cladibus affuefcere docuit 
organ plays in the longroom, while the 
knights take place according to their 
Monument Atthe Mendicanti one Bufbnell, an Eng- In 1663. Sig’ri Simon Giogalli and Gu- 
On that side of the piazza the palace 
with a head in it of stone. 
Over the gate that leads into the pa- 
Out of the Vroetschap are also chosen 
lowermost-names are Etheus and Stemines. 
names near the landing place ; then hired 
yet pav'd, are eight in length, and there 
a wall and trench ; the town is but small ; 
large wooden bridge, 
honour to the several podesta’s. 
which come down the Rhine with wine, &c. 
line, a corporal and two files of soldiers 
open for his eyes) and a lighted taper in 
this infcription ; 
the number of the chief and wealthy 
hung full of colours, flags, banners, 
ments of hearing; two books with figures 
to Soncin, a little wall’d town, ditch’d 
Underneath the cathedral is a church 
any merchandize, &c. they search it and 
which is white bread made into a ring. 
most impregnable, having very strong 
hospital ; the revenue of this place is 
is done, and sees that nothing be acted to 
chandizes from thence and other places. 
auditory sung a Salve Regina upon their 
rupted by the scholars ; and he familiarly 
smiths. 
which are put into a cold water for a month 
the domo, a stately fire-work (represent- 
carved in the marble. Of the steeple 
with the states-general. 
High Dutch, Low Dutch, and French ; each 
Charles V. ftood, is this infcription, 
the most southern part of christendom; 
and D. Agidius du Faing, who had been 
neral; over the gate of the last was writ- 
Funii c1stocxxi111 ipfaq; Domina Hippolita 
painted ; the walls are also curiously pic- 
Guardia. This city is 1500 rod (canne) 
for merchants to do, who seldom trust 
and in giving notice to the superior in- 
made of the bark of a tree, Guaiana cro- 
Venus, in antique statues, and even upon a medal of Faustina, is often 
 
Nigh the door is written, 
against the two ashore ; fo that two poi- 
flo. subluteo ; Sana fancta, Ind. good against 
The Arena was formerly an amphi- 
ments to several of his family, about the 
the Hague, where it is convenient to take Z,rycent 
barrow to our lodging. 
The stadthouse is a fair building, having The stadt 
spector, if there be any over him. 
ing inlaid and painted with different co- 
brass and stone, rare pictures, &c. This 
the Spaniards were called in for assistance ; 
They take this oath; which I shall 
bishop procur’d it of one Fra. Fiamingo 
Another doel call’d St. George’s. 
Rhombus: 2. Mustachin biancho, made in 
ing call’d Mons pietatis, where there is a 
assemble when the states-provincial are 
at g of the clock. In the morning they 
who performed mafs, read a chapter in 
In the gardens we saw pots they pre- 
ously inlaid ; in one place are figured two 
Here are also two jasper pillars hollowed 
on one is a pretty garden and fountain ; 
were exposed here when the Tybur ran 
feats and the organ are of moft curious 
flo. odorato fol. rot. Thlaspi fol. sampsuchi ; 
rarely painted with angels, &c. the walls 
others, the similar parts might be found, even of superior workman- 
joined in without the organ; but, after 
when he was bilfhop of Antioch, is kept 
verfarium 20 miffar, a mortuis de x1 men- 
ward than the lower, being design’d to 
jollity continued, and in the morning was 
 can put into frames, and hang up 
wrw 
2. Tresegmes, and La Laing. 3. Merode, 
Venice; and in each are feven or eightmen, Perterritos Duces, plorantes Cives 
field sable, a cross argent with four heads 
pulpit; then he brought the book to the 
market-place, are more baths of the same 
The government of the cities in Hol-The go 
seen in the like posture with the Venus de Medicis; yet no certain conse- 
whitish wine, made at Desenca, not far 
five months old preserved in a glass full 
umbras 2 
Milan; then thro’ Tizengo, a small place, 
a Venetian reformed and perfected it. Solus fenex ferreum fe murum objiciens 
line, where Italian is spoken altogether. 
and hard ; they have no bad cattle, and 
cannot bullets, scowrers, &c. are kept. 
tons before, and his cap embroidered 
berries at this time, and little fresh cheeses 
On the ground stands a large lion well 
March 9. O. S. was a great festival so- 
Tempora fi queris, que me rapuere fub 
have their diet and lodging in a long 
fifters, who help as fervants in ordinary 
Glisson de Hepate; the muscles of the 
Over their rivers are large bridges of 
See the Grisons government in Mr. 
different market-place, and a little square 
the altar, is a stately monument of the 
cofts about 8d. One gave enough lately 
the image of the virgin Mary treading on 
brought, an Eschevin sitting president ; 
we took up our lodging at the sign of the 
leus, Incus & Stapes, being the instru- 
the priests have their share in the silk. 
Most of their houses are built of stone, 
the couriers, where we found a croud of 
and the bishop of Beziers, the French king’s 
the Ptolemys were engraved in the same manner ; nothing being finer 
knocking against the board, an officer 
in it: and two miles and a half farther we 
161... The feats are still remaining. 
gon to Middleburg. 
of a sea-cow, sea-hog’s head like that of 
figure of the virgin Mary and our Saviour, 
and two, with lighted torches in their 
per at 5 of the clock, and to bed at 10. 
 
large bellies with narrow mouths, and 
hath no stipend.
In a fair and large street is a pillar 
About the walls of this isle are pitured 
before her father’s house : one riding on 
in the Sacristia is a rich picture. 
to the prince, who sends them his deter- 
inscription, 
asking peoples charity ; and we saw this 
Romauntsh (which is also spoken by the 
find Flos Sulphuris. 
fishermen to make in their boats. 
 
of the city, which is of a triangular fi- 
The aqueduct ends at a neat cloifter, &c. 
after that we went through another wood 
in the mud, and faften’d to the boat by an 4 Chrifto, Venetifq, Transfugam 
by some of the provinces now called the 
offer up to the states debate. 
these fire-works made then a very great 
wealth, which is now the most consider- united pro- 
muscles, &c. which were drawn by his 
grate in the wall, thro’? which we faw the 
The crucifix that spoke to Thomas 
made of a Bezoar ; Balsamum Arab.; the 
shoulders. Before and after the execu- 
ascents and descents, yet the two chief 
breath of wind that tempers the heat ; 
left side of the river we saw Weset, a 
ners, and a relick carried on mens shoul- 
up the duke’s train; and after him came 
[Low C 
linder (like those in nunneries) and 
and under them is a Dutch and Latin in- 
much in love with the earl of Effex, whom Triumphorum plenus 
word, except the priorefs gives them 
neumon ; several pictures done in minia-
6. Gifla, Ogme Soror, ultericri lapide 
faints. Before the entrance is ereéted 
strong place of the Venetians, having a 
seems a dialect of the Sclavonic: their food is of the coarsest kind; 
for the putting in of the bunches, after 
fell at Messina. The king of Spain and 
country mended. A mile or two before 
The fifh-markets afford great variety 
gave four guns, answered by Ca. Sal- 
 
people living to a good age in this place. 
tum ; Facobaea fol. Betonicae n. d. Thlaspi 
Templo Deiparee Salutari aurea lampade, Vota. 
hour, one of the disguis’d gave him an 
d' India, Clus. Exot. Cassia Vera 3 Rhamnus 
they will ordinarily sum up their ac- 
sarissen op de cleyne sacken. 
Lawrence, and is a large brick building ; church. 
they make very good cheese. 
half a furlong long, and conveys water 
foot, one of which is English under Capt. 
Their carts are small, and made to go 
Tragedy. One night we faw at S. Samuello a tra- Cretenfis vocabulo aptius Loneftes 
ter, as the. workmen pleafe ; for at AC8 Natalinum Furlanum 
lowing in{cription. 
At the Dominicans, call’d S. Tho. 
much linnen about their heads and necks, 
hung round with pictures, and adorned 
del, and attended Petty (whose picture we 
of Holland and the delegates of I. Dort, 2. Harlem, 
kind of mat fasten’d into the ground to 
year 1623. when the Spaniards besieged 
a platform near it. The great church is 
ww 
Daucus Cret. verus ; Stachys Cret. Salviae 
shirt—drawers and spatterdashes of the same materials—sandals of 
mornings, &c. no man else being suf- 
where one morning we saw a physician 
Innocent X. 
150 students live in this feminary, and 
intended to send into England. In the 
fight of Tergoes and several islands of Zea- 
the choir, where our matters of colleges, 
Canislevis; 41. Canis aculeatus; 42. Can- 
In the country villages causes of 50 Courts of 
a time, every night. 
several places of the city. 
In this church hangs (from the middle 
fenators. When the duke entred the choir, 
found that did relieve the city when it 
the book. The duke, nuncio, &c. were 
Donna Regina is a Franciscan nunnery Donna Re- 
Aconitum pardalianches Matth. which is 
an altar table of this church is an iron 
Hilp. Sicil. & Ind. Regi, Flandr. 
do to and fro in Germany) they may be 
his shop with his wares, making altars 
while, and read somewhat, with much 
vernment of) the states-general. 
The government is in the hands of a 
bishop is chief judge ; next to him is the 
joyning. The prefent patriarch’s name is 
il Broglio. 
An English church here. 
lours, make the pictures in the walls and 
came by the palace of Grimani on the 
length, whence they bring stone from a 
molli horti Eyst. Triticum Ind. perenne fol. 
exhortation; and at some sign or word, 
about it, and, two miles further, baited 
inn, that is counted but four hours from 
take them for real ones. The floor is 
excommunicating. He receives all tithes, 
wall of Worms does about an inward wall. 
Sxirvon. 2, Cadentia pre nimia Vetuftate telta ma- by the Giefuati, a fair building ; the Of 
the hangman turn’d him off, and to 
are absolute in their small jurisdictions, 
but endeavouring to bring the 17 pro- 
ligion, who speak an odd language, called 
at a village call’d Cursan. After dinner 
who visit the town; the names of the subscribers are written in a 
lines, but the rock they are built on, 
bishop 1598. 
Aquinas, is kept in a chapel over an 
May 22. Was this procession: Drum- 
stout wall, broad ditch, and fair bull- 
petalum, which grows in Apulia; Betri 
and faid fomewhat; then made their 
about the house, and other handsome 
about 17 miles, and at a village call’d 
paid four perpaiola. This is a pass 
like his robes; about his waist a girdle: 
of the feven) viz. nine out of Bor- 
as follows, viz. 
len, the large valley and country about 
enough to bear so great a weight: off the 
but the figure of a lozenge in lieu of it. 
east; but the minister did, when he fell 
Opposite to the duke’s palace is a 
before St. Mark’s lion; and the statues 
where the priests that attend wear a white 
yer very earnestly discoursing in a pulpit 
with a little old castle in the dutchy of 
from thence, at the corner of St. Mark’s 
hour after ten in the morning we sailed by 
began a psalm, which the congregation 
at leait three good cart loads, and may be A Turcis Fefu Bethleemi 
Meurs. Ath. Bataviae. It is a round hill, 
arr 
much of: by the same art, he said, he 
(as a school-master is said to have described the scholars of a rival 
van Ghiftele, Vrawevan Kalkedre, Vackdele 
over a door is the effigies of Urban VIII. 
Behind the high altar is a lesser altar, 
1631. AEtalis 72. 
with lighted tapers in their hands ; which 
tempest lasted till next morning. 
isles on each side the choir: a pinnacle was 
for 12000 maffes. 
cross on their left shoulder. 
in it are two organs, and a monument with 
befides two men to manage the mud-boat. Milites abeuntes revocavit 
genia Philippi II. Hifp. regis filia, 
number of men, two and two together, 
ments made a concert; and, when all 
with signatures and seals, called a diploma, is given to the traveller, 
the largeness of the nofe; possibly the partition along the vertebrae of 
Skippon. 
bends a little forwards ; but when it goes Pené expugnata propugnavit 
the Theatins, where, on the left side of Apostoli. 
astronomy and other parts of mathema- 
outside, and the history of them explained hishouse 
whence we had a prospect of the city, 
page, Crocon. In the next book, Lor- 
judgment, there is an appeal to the Es- 
but they are not regarded out of his 
Nigh the fifh-market, by St. Mark’s 
landed at the piazza of St. Mark. 
vadore with three ; then gave the 
he would have them take notice of any 
I observed one day at the end of this 
who might make this a thriving place, if 
guilla barbatas 39. Perca Marina; 40, 
knowledging none their superior but the 
building, having many porches or en- 
beard, the chalice he us’d with his dif- 
Borgogne ; Aban, Belfort and Lans, are 
altar. 
came to the domo (a fair church) which 
lick was brought to them, which they 
rife at 5, and work before dinner an 
Casadi Dio. 
tila ; the head of an Indian bird, called 
place as noted for cakes of sweet almonds, 
feet, with this inscription under all, 
In the J’viday market-place, on the 
long and narrow ponds, with rows of 
on it, having this following inscription, 
fer’d to walk among them: it is called 
shewed these rarities. A medal of At- 
June 30, our carts carried us through 
two ranks on each fide. When the high 
pictures, &c. and as they began to enter 
where the laft bifhop of Ghent lies buried, 
ten, 
and these verses ; 
our Saviour’s statues in S. Peter’s church, 
vocal mufick made a concert. One of 
statues, and this French epitaph. 
of which hath four magistrates for life: 
matrices of diamonds, with diamonds in 
particles of gold within the body of cry- 
tenhoven under the duke of Gulich ; in an 
self, being jealous, was the cause of his 
nulphi, filia Hermanni, Ducis Saxo- 
queen Bertha and her husband. The mo- 
make crystals hollow, they use oil of 
BONG The firft time I was at Venice there wete Englifh« 
covers of the fountains we were told they 
and drapers, having before their shops 
last duke of Gulic and Cleve in his will or- 
like pictures. Among the dry’d plants we 
of S. Clare, and is a large cloifter. Over oc 
sworn by the states-general, and they 
are changed at several stages, when they 
From Lausdun we went to Riswick, a Another of 
ner folded up; which in time of joy is 
mile through Obersheim, which is a small 
sence, the lieutenant general. 
der of friars habited in white, without
we took boat, past by Ramekins, and in 
terscarp. Over the gate here is in- 
make boxes, seals, and other knacks of 
lumes, fairly written, and adorned with 
dwellings situated near it. 
borus niger trifol. spin. Cyclamen Baldense 
a slately palace, which a Burgrave looks 
suffer’d us to enter the walls of this city, 
ferences between masters and servants are 
rienced hand. To conclude my account of this celebrated Venus, with 
over with checquins. 
to: 1000 soldiers in garrison ; the gover- 
We heard part of a divinity and law 
ten, Fiat voluntas Dei. After an hour’s 
of Nassau, colonel of a Walloon regiment, 
night, and then was cut down. 
may fall out. Every fcoop full is equal to Habes tot documenta 
ed; in the first of the north side, on the 
an ass came before him, with a large ban- 
prison, and another handsome large build- 
the refectory, and Hermathenaeum, a long 
reach’d Luick or Liege (four leagues from 
priest and all the servants belong- 
wards and forwards a little. Parvaq, manu profligatus 
cetis 31. Surés 32. Squillae /pecies 5 33. 
the air being very clear; and tho’ it is 
part of the town, In the middle, upon the 
burgomasters, to whom is joyn’d a Sca- 
parent, that the light of a candle may be 
was gaudily drest up with gilt hangings, 
thefe pictures, viz. The duke of Buck- 
burg should have Gulich and Monts, and the 
some days and nights 
&c. by ufing fome of the oy! in a lamp 
is well guarded and watched by many sen- 
tec, alivs Punétulis Ciner. 14. Grancepole ; 
punishment, they draw up his sentence, 
large trench of water. The town is but 
May 26. We hired a boat with three 
the entrance of it is written, Hic fides 
one of the doors this inscrib’d, 
chap. 6. 
of white liquor ; scorpions and a Lacerta 
Peftore fub medio, Phoebum cerxebat 
This inscrib’d on the Sapienza. 
Tyber, S. Peters, &c. 
Padua, tho’ they behav’d soberly. 
this journey we drank a very strong and 
cording to the amount of the gift: a copper ring, with an image of 
within the choir, is an ancient monument cans 
7) the 
of the pope’s court. 
XXXI den eerfte dach van Auf. 
diem. 
In the church called still the Franciscans, Francis- 
of the Vena Splenica, the Fibrillae serving 
fprinkled in the duke’s, nuncio’s, and 
tion, who also disposes of vacant places 
the encroachments of the sea, and hath 
lemniz’d for St. Joseph, and before the 
werp. The exchange is over a channel 
Palazzo de Marino hath a fair stone 
very thick ; so that the whole city 
the prejudice of the court, or that con- 
hour and an half to Dort, where the Eng- 
June 29, we hired two such carts as we 
of fifh, viz. 1. Orada; 2. Rubellio; 
sion here every day of all sorts, and for 
When they came into St. Mark’s church, 
shewed us in their vestry one of the pieces 
The pulpit is placed nigh the cloister, 
night, we arrived about 22 hours under 
the ftreets: Firft came a crofs, then ban- 
The Carmelites church is handsome. 
St. Peter's 
the revenues of the church, and assumed 
the first tree is the pedigree from Adam 
the mint-mafters ftood on each fide, and 
chia, a great village with a ditch only 
dered, that the males failing, the eldest 
We return’d through Armuyden, a little 
A court of The Bosch, Bredah, Bergen op Zoome, 
garden ; it is of good length and breadth. Garden. 
A fair stone pair of stairs leads up to a 
stab a spit in several places. 
The bread of this country is black 
adorn’d with statues. The streets are 
stock or bank of money, which is lent 
a wall not so firm. 
byterium. Then all the consistory can 
and arched place, adorn’d with arms, 
May 23. About three in the afternoon 
off, there being fix’d to it a brass bason, 
scriptions to these two faints ; the body 
a boccale of water; then they put it into 
mon preached by a Dominican friar ; and 
leys or with their friends in their own 
In the third tree are 20 names, the pedi- 
now S. Cofmus and S. Damianus church. Romulus 
painting, handsome drawings, of Roman 
consists of feven assessors, a secretary, a 
the third year new ones are made. 
on. They are of St. Carlo Borromeo’s 
One afternoon while we were at Mes- 
chiduci Auftrie, Burgundie, &c, 
bark, which was towed by one horse ; 
that house. 
appear’d in a leaning posture. 
trances of stone, much adorned with sta- 
nigh Belfort, a very mean and old castle, 
piece of wood ftrengthen’d with four crofs Thracum claffes vifloriarum aura tumidas 
The abbey of St. Benedif? hath a fair 
or three streets, one very large, fet with 
Effex was fufpected, and fo loft his life. Lachrymabundi pofuere. 
ways present a delegate from the prince, 
take the kernel of walnut, linseed, &c. 
Tarantula Apula, which he kept some 
strangle him the sooner, leap’d upon his 
who enjoy their religion privately. The 
&c. a little bell isrung atthe port. Here 
turning by the aforefaid Ja Donna di mar, 
“uKNS, 
In that printed at Basel 1640, and 
that it is shut up close. We saw the 
A fair hospital for men, and another Hospitals. 
pass’d in fight of two sconces,and after three 
belongs to the states, a tenth part to the 
piazza, is a large houfe, over the door 
on each side is another portico. Over 
the Scabini or Eschevins: in some cities 
Aree In 1664. Signior. Pietro Paolo Campana 
Anno 1555, 25 Oct. Charles V. made 
palace, where, in one room, are many 
At Venice every mafs faid for the dead, 
presbytery ex gr. In Heidelberg are five 
erected to him. In this convent, Dr. Cor- 
and greens in a pot. They have a fair 
seem’d to be of a flame in the night, 
Patriarch 
their occupations are those of pastors or husbandmen. 
them to the town of Neustatt (a little 
fore many women that have bastards, 
ried the second daughter that was the 
from the neighbouring hills to the city. 
mean condition. 
taxes, than for the maintenance of their 
tabile,; Essentia Lapid. Bezoar. a cup 
fed que 
On June 22, the weather was very 
altar, fix mitred persons shew’d the host 
ered with gold, having great gold but- 
col. Stellaria saxisraga Bavar. Flos passionis 
underneath. Erafmus’s picture is over 
trance into the palace is a fair and great 
place, where it will appear like a coal 
runs (as we were told) two hours in 
embassador, on the left. The duke and 
parlour, freely difcourfed with Madame 
garii Regis Italorum, bic fepulius. 
hung very thick in the front with es- 
hath, the whole length of it, a long and church 
Fiscalis. In a vacancy the chapter chuses 
all flat roofed, the roofs have a firm plai- 
sul or burgomaster. 
cer, with a red cap, and a cecchino fa- 
On the south side of St. Mark’s is a 
of Venice’s 
found at Feltre in Ombria ; Macchunia Ind. 
did declare war against the duke d’ Alva, 
word and Meppelle are in Drent. 
daughter should inherit, and the males 
Three miles from Crema we rode thro’ 
The Grisons pay no gables or taxes ; 
congees, and returned to their feats on 
A large room in this palace, where the 
The go- Drent chuses a governor, and concurs 
of Gibraltar, the other with the earl of 
well strengthned with a broad trench full 
mention, That Joach. Abbas Sanclorius 
those that bring them bills of exchange 
Belvidera; in the wild boar’s head belonging to the statue of Meloager, in 
this grate, and lay them in a hollow cy- 
immediately before the duke, who was 
bytery fits once a week, and there is al- 
D. O. M. 
inscrib’d, 
for women. 
a fair piazza before the Domo. The la- 
the judgment of some connoisseurs, they allow, that in comparing the 
counts with a piece of chalk. 
have their upper stories bending more for- 
At a fellow turns 
therein feveral pieces of this ftone, which 
written Magna fides. The gentry and 
island. 
chamber ; and there are professors that 
like curds ; good little cheeses made of 
years old, being begun 1566. It is built 
the V. Ma- 
dame Wakeman (who has a brother in the 
under another bridge is a room where 
provinces united against the Spaniards in 
is a picture, one of himself, the other of 
Nardus Mont. I. Clus. fol. splendente ? Cisti 
pets, tapestry, &c. hung out of the 
to the nearest gate, where they had horses 
town. 
in their church observ’d round the seats of 
nity, being here blasphemously repre- 
of the first, a lyon gules, a rose gules be- 
upper room or hall where the synod fat 
kind usage. The walls of it within the 
water, and at last sassomorto. When they 
quando fi cuocono fotto la cinere poi fi riduffe 
Under them is the Valteline, which is 
of popes, citizens of Bononia, viz. Gre- 
fair collection of Roman coins, statues in 
enquired into by that jurisdiction ; which, Skippon. 
Al journey thro’ Part of the 
embassadors were covered : gentlemen held 
boys, which is esteem’d highly : the arch- 
phi, Comes Flandrie, duno 1035. bic 
The piazza of St. Mark is neatly pav’d 
Lebani ; Adianthum Canad. cornuti ; Cistus 
hand preserv’d like Monsicur de Bils his 
This church and many others, was 
hands, every order having its cross, ban- 
at Hierusalem. Then they were call’d 
and chuse 
day, stilo novo, we saw this procession, 
lemniz’d with the same jollity, which was 
which are proportioned according to the 
which were brought from Constantinople. 
nealis of men, which were very small; 
lowed by the Messanese for a physick physick 
and filled with wax. 
In the Low Dutch church are these three 
trances into each ifleof the choir: the 
[ Italy. 
is no appeal) called the Lottinch ; it hath 
Nuns of 
the emperor and empress of Germany ; 
owner, and his chancellor lives there. 
have more freedom than others: their 
many counsellors being present. When 
Hirundo Piscis here. Monte Aspero not 
Reed sparrows observ’d here. 
the west door, the walls whereof are well 
balcony round the infide of it. 
Camere Locante, being three chambers 
sheeps milk. It is a saying here, La 
One that is not a senator, may be a con- 
nates two persons to the prince, who be- 
D. Marcus Sofpitator mer, fellow of Trinity-college Cambridge, 
In the middle of the choir, is a stately 
wall’d place under the bishop of Liege, 
raine and Harquourt ; in the third book, 
When we came down into a lower ground, 
Nigh the afore-mention’d Neustatt are 
It is fhut by winding up the rope S at P, _ In Aloyfio vel Extinéto rugit 
rod, and this written, 
were plac’d on it. There was a great re- 
of spectators. In the night was the most 
goddess, as may be further seen in AElius Lampridius +. 
the marquis of Brandenburg, who married 
of Orange; and an hour further we 
garden of rare plants. 
Each college’s deputies are chosen and 
a silver plate is shot for. 
tions here) we saw a fellow hang’d that 
xit Kal. Sent. 
Englith 
ing matter Gabaros. He hath a pretty 
nobility, and five delegates, one from 
a Vicarius and two Oeconomi to look after 
place, a stadthouse, and a great church ; 
four in scarlet ; next two or three noble- 
cietto (where ships make their quaran- 
hand, and a bible in the other, treading 
towards the piazza, is inscrib’d on the 
ately, and kill’d two of the Bravi. The 
tenute nell’ terminacioni di SS. ill’miin tal materia difponente. L. filveftre Cont?ni Pr, 
double portico, the uppermost whereof Skippon. 
to our lodgings. 
fastened a cecchino of gold; then came 
gan to play. In the church, at the high 
fore him lies a crosier staff, and a car- 
